## The CARE principles that underpin conservation planning

The four key principles that should be considered when designing a spatial plan are Connectivity, Adequacy, Representation, and Efficiency (CARE). The CARE principles are fundamental to conserving  biodiversity over the long term.
* **Connectivity**: Connectivity is the exchange of individuals (or genes, traits, energy or materials) among habitat patches, populations, communities or ecosystems. Ensuring connectivity could include protecting sources and sinks of coral or fish larvae, migration corridors for terrestrial and marine vertebrates, stopover sites for migratory birds, or keeping interdependent habitats that species need throughout their life cycle (e.g., nesting and feeding grounds).
* **Adequacy**: An adequate conservation area should contain enough of each species and habitat to ensure that they persist through time. This is achieved by ensuring that a minimum target amount of each habitat and species are conserved within the protected area network. Some species and habitats need more conservation than others.
* **Representation**: This principle is the foundation of area-based conservation approaches. It aims to ensure a sample of all biodiversity present in a region receives some form of protection. Species, habitats, ecosystems, and key ecological processes should all be represented and replicated throughout a spatial plan.
* **Efficiency**: This principle seeks to deliver conservation outcomes whilst minimizing impacts on people, industries and communities that also rely on natural resources. Conservation plans that have less impact on people and their livelihoods are likely to find broader support. However, efficiency can also lead to residual protected areas. These are areas with low human use that can be preferentially selected in the solution because they are cheap (low cost), but sometimes have little conservation benefit.
